[Music]
welcome to topcast and for a re-release
in a sense of part two
of the conversation i had with
christopher
of the do explain podcast now this
podcast has not been released by me yet
it hasn't appeared on my youtube channel
or in my podcast feed but it's appeared
on the do explain podcast feed which i
encourage everyone to subscribe to to
explain
chris has lots of really interesting
conversations with people of various
levels of sympathy one might say with
the worldview of david deutch it is a
diverse panoply of people that chris
talks to and so encourage you to check
out do explain and subscribe to do
explain and support
to explain if you can what we're talking
about support i've heard that if you hit
the subscribe button this is what
youtubers apparently say then this helps
me out somehow rather or hit the little
bell thing that's up there apparently
that helps too so for the first time
ever i'm saying that hey why not
subscribe to my channel today in this
episode this part of the conversation
was a long conversation i had with chris
we're talking about all the classics all
my greatest hits free will and
consciousness i'm talking about
bayesianism the most fun part i think of
the conversation aside from talking to
chris was at the end he likes to take
questions from twitter and so that was
lots of fun trying to muddle my way
through
answers from twitter and so that's a fun
part towards the end of this interview
conversation whatever it is chris does
over there at do explain and aside from
that i think one of my favorite parts of
the conversation is
my attempt to explain theories as
criticisms
this is accepted reasonably well or at
least people understand that in science
increasingly they're coming to
understand science
covered irrationalities aside people are
starting to understand that science is a
process and so science is this error
correcting mechanism as we say in
porpyrian terms
we don't have a
fundamental set of beliefs
in science that's not what science is
about we don't say that here forever as
an unchanging model of the atom or here
forever is our unchanging model of the
cosmos
we change our ideas over time as we
correct our errors it's not like
everything gets thrown out but nothing
stays the same for long because that's
how we improve that's how we make
progress
that's uncontroversial except when it
comes to morality when it comes to
morality some people have
even rational people people who are
ostensibly experts in the area of
morality and philosophy they think that
morality the whole domain of the whole
area of knowledge which is morality
operates via a different epistemology as
compared to
science and so in morality you have your
foundational beliefs and they just
cannot possibly change or be improved
you cannot make progress upon them or
some people think at least insofar as
you can make progress there needs to be
a foundation i won't mention any names
because
lots of people make this error i think
it began basically with religion it was
probably there in the antecedents when
we weren't even able to speak language
this idea that there is a certain set of
beliefs practices ways of doing things
that just must stand for all time these
are the moral things and so morality is
seen to stand apart epistem in
epistemological terms as compared to
every other area of knowledge where we
can incrementally make progress and
correct errors over time but it's just
not so
morality like science is a process of
criticizing our best understandings of
whatever our present set of explanations
and theories happens to be and so if we
take any one moral theory we should see
it as a criticism of what we should do
next and so it can be seen as a guide
but not a foundation not a fixed thing
for more on this by the way
see my youtube video which is a response
to sam harris when he talked to david
deutsch precisely about this point about
this idea of what the nature of morality
is but for now enjoy my conversation
with chris on do explain
all right christopher here welcome to do
explain
before we begin i'd like to thank my
current supporters who inspired me to
carry on with this project and make it
financially viable as well i'm very
grateful to all of you big hugs and
while i'm not in the business of telling
people what to do i can't share my
vision for do explain going forward i
like to work on the podcast full-time
instead of just a few days a month i
want to build a real platform for the
fun and friendly exchange of interesting
ideas and i want to do it ad free if
possible because i don't want any ideas
to be off limits for us to explore and i
also want to keep saying dumb [__]
without repercussions but to do this
i'll need a steady income and that's why
i need your help
so if you enjoy what i'm doing here you
want to join me in my vision and become
a part of growing this project consider
going over to
patreon.com do explain and sign up to
become a monthly supporter
alright thanks for listening i hope you
enjoyed this episode
[Music]
yeah that's one of the i think most
subtle difficult changes in perspective
if you come to this popular way of
understanding knowledge and david has
emphasized this in certain places and it
is a kind of shocking when you accept it
and what i'm talking about here is that
all the theories are critical in the
sense that they are criticisms of
every other competitor to them and
sometimes there is no other competitor
but they should be seen as criticism so
something like quantum theory the
scientific theory of quantum theory is a
criticism of every other competing claim
about the nature of reality so a
scientific theory is a criticism which
is an interesting way of thinking about
things and so then when you get to
something like
morality that's a really interesting way
of thinking about morality and why we
think in
this way of thinking about knowledge
that there is no foundation for morality
in the same way there's no foundation
for science there's not some set of
axioms from which you
build the rest of your scientific
edifice
no what you're doing is you're
explaining stuff and in explaining
you're criticizing the alternative so
when it comes to morality for example
it's not like we say okay well
utilitarianism is the ultimate
foundation for morality or indeed uh you
know the bible is the ultimate
foundation for reality or pick whatever
your favorite moral theory is that's not
what knowledge is knowledge isn't about
starting from foundations and then
deriving
what you're supposed to think is
absolutely true and in the case of
morality what you think you should do
next now instead you come up with a
guess about what you should do next and
then you criticize it and you might use
these grand moral theories as criticisms
of your theory about what to do next
because that's essentially what morality
is about what to do next where science
is about what is the case given you know
um what we know about reality
um so so this concept of the critical
nature of knowledge uh even people
hearing me speak now might still be
thinking that what we're saying is that
in this world view these four strands as
david refers to them as uh the
the final word on uh the way in which we
understand reality no these are
criticisms of every other alternative uh
and there are
in our in our estimation
no viable alternatives you know when we
get to critical rationalism in
particular this way of understanding the
nature of knowledge
it is a minority view it remains a
minority view the majority view is still
some version of plato's justified true
belief idea this inductivist conception
that you accumulate uh evidence over
time become more and more certain about
your ideas and then bayesianism as you
know as i like to say the the
inductivism in a cheap tuxedo it's just
where you you then put a mathematical
formula on top of your inductivism and
just say well we're going to extrapolate
uh what is actually ultimately true and
we'll get more and more confident and
we'll we'll continue to increase our
confidence with each new bit of evidence
that we gather in our theory and so this
is the most common way the most popular
way that scientists think about how
science works and uh poppa was the one
who said you know this entire conception
of the way in which knowledge is built
and the way which sciences works it just
cannot possibly be the case uh we can't
get to the final answer and in any way
knowledge is objective and we started
off with that little sketch you know and
make me have to go at some people and i
do like to have a go
as much as i support someone like euron
brooke and i think euron brooke is a
great defender of things like capitalism
i think that fundamentally einrad got
epistemology wrong and i'm kind of
offended to some extent that she called
the epistemology that she has
objectivism i i she's taken it away
in a sense and and messed it up messed
up what epistemologist popper has
genuinely objective knowledge he is
talking about not only knowledge in
objects but an objective way beyond your
mind beyond your personal experience of
being able to assess a claim as being
forced being able to refute a claim he
doesn't rely on certainty or confidence
but this is precisely the way that
the objectivists the iron rand
objectivists talk about knowledge and
it's it's a wrong way to talk about it's
wrong way to conceive of knowledge as
being about being certain what you can
be certain of because then it reduces
epistemology to
feelings to emotions and iran is
supposed to be not about emotions but in
this case when it comes to epistemology
the most important branch of philosophy
to some extent about which you learn and
you're able to judge the rest of
um philosophy and the rest of knowledge
you
give up on actual objectivism and you go
down the road of feelings and you go
down the road of uh how confident are
you in this particular claim or you know
how certain can you be
accumulating evidence and of course she
doesn't she doesn't understand the
problems with inductivism either and
neither do the the objectivists yeah
that's a shame and and that that's
probably the
the closest and it's not really close
but uh at least compared to some of the
other ways in which scientists
themselves talk about how we know that a
particular scientific theory is a good
scientific theory or a good explanation
they they talk in terms of uh you know
this accumulation of evidence over time
which increases your confidence and they
will have some sort of calculation and
so this is where we get this notion of
bayesianism from
yeah so so i want to ask you something
more about that actually but i just want
to add to our talk about knowledge and
knowledge growth and misconceptions
there
there's no such thing as a theory
without a corresponding problem that the
theory is meant to solve
and i also think that this is very
counterintuitive to people especially
coming from
traditional school system
which is not at all problem-centered but
it's about here is everything you need
to learn that's fundamental and it
basically just endorses memory
memorization because of that thing
because if you don't have a problem
situation where you can actively create
this knowledge to fit into your unique
uh situation everybody's problem
situation is different then it's not
going to click for you you might learn
quote unquote a certain fact but you
have nowhere to place it in relation to
your problems and hence you didn't learn
anything you memorized it and then like
most people you forget about it and so
what was the point of that
so for instance when someone like
sam harris and i bring him up because
just as you have mentioned in your own
response to his recent amusings about
free will and the self
he has the best explanation and the best
defense of this
theory against free will and the self
and so that's why we're bringing him up
and he's also very famous and reaches a
lot of people so i kind of want to
offer an alternative view here and push
back on that since we think we have the
better explanation but
to me his whole view seems to be
disregarding the fact that
free will is
an entity invoked by our best
explanations of the behavior of people
choices is needed to explain why we do
different things free choices and his
whole stick seems to be to deny that
theory just like
he or other people might deny
computational universal
universality and then there's nothing in
its place and you've spoken about this
at great length that just because we
have a problem with the theory doesn't
mean we just refute it because we don't
have anything better to jump to and his
alternative
and people in his camps like robert
sapolsky who i also think is is a really
cool guy and i like listening to him but
it's the same thing there it's oh it's
all determined
that's what i take from that it's all
determined and everything just happens
and that doesn't help us at all to solve
the problem of differentiating between
different variants of voluntary behavior
and hence it's not enough
to
refute the notion of free will as we see
it
yeah and sam does say of course he
accepts the reality of choices he just
doesn't think that we make them i don't
know what makes them if it's not that's
the same problem right you just push it
back
yes well what makes them then oh
determinism yeah but that's not an
explanation
we're reduced to
the same
sort of state as any other animal so so
the cat you know choosing between
whether to remain asleep or to get up
and go to the uh the dish and have some
food
there's a choice there being made in the
same way that we make a choice on this
view that there is nothing really there
other than the unfolding of physical
laws acting upon mata in a sense
now
we can argue against the the objective
reality of what i would say
the necessity of free will is but but i
i just want to point to
this notion of
sam's
claim that subjectively we have no
experience of free will and he says that
you know this is one of the
one of the interesting insights of
being contemplative or of introspecting
of of meditating perhaps and being
mindful about
how thoughts arise and that if you're in
this state you can see that thoughts
simply arise now what we would want to
say about that is that firstly that's an
empiricist claim what you're doing there
is you're relying upon your own personal
experience of something and concluding
on the basis that therefore your ex your
interpretation of that particular
experience must therefore be true
in the same way that you know my
the way i like to think about it is and
following david deutch saying this in a
slightly different context our
experience of
stars in the night sky
are of small dim
cold points of light but our experience
of that tells us nothing about the
underlying reality what we are
necessarily compelled
to accept as being true about the nature
of stars namely that they're actually
huge and hot
furnaces
fusing hydrogen into helium and we don't
get that from our experience of stars it
comes via a chain of explanation and in
the same way i would suggest that
although you might have the experience
of lacking free will
at certain moments for example when you
deliberately try not to engage with a
problem and sam says you know this is an
important function of meditation is to
drop your problem for a while to to not
be caught up with your thoughts
well yeah i i am unsurprised that in
those moments that you don't have the
experience of free will but therefore
concluding on that basis that because
you lack the experience
that therefore there is no free will is
a non-sequitur because there's lots of
things we don't have experience of which
nonetheless are real and vice versa
which we do have experience of but which
aren't real namely the stars again okay
we have the experience of the cold star
but in fact it's a hot ball of gas
and that's the subjective way in which i
would engage with the free will debate
just i would suggest that
subjectively there are times and all i
can do and this is where we get into
just we were at loggerheads sam will say
well no i don't have the experience and
anyone who meditates uh will agree with
me that you don't have the expense for
it all i can say to that is i do i do
have the experience the thought arises
now where does the thought arise in me
that is me
part of me part of the nature of being a
person is you have the conscious
experience of thoughts you're not
identical to those thoughts you have
those thoughts but those thoughts arise
somewhere namely in you
you are the thing that is giving rise to
those thoughts you are this creative
mind
from which the thoughts are springing
that's you that is as much you as the
conscious experience of those thoughts
and that is just the subjective way of
it now i can talk about the objective
way of dealing with this yeah absolutely
but i think i think the subjective entry
point is good because sam stresses that
that's his original
contribution to this timeless debate of
free will which is you you're actually
wrong about your subjective experience
and
i mean you you can go down the route of
saying okay but it's a definitional game
sam is saying that i is the conscious
experience the conscious representation
that's what he says doesn't exist and we
would say that yeah but that's a too
narrow of a definition i know that david
deutch has a great example of solipsism
a refutation of that in the fabric of
reality where he says that there are
problems with uh defining i that
narrowly
so so that's the difference between us
but also i think the the deeper problem
there with his argument
is as you've already said but i have a
different angle here
the same mistake a lot of meditators
make about the empiricism here that
there's such a thing as direct
observation right because his argument
seems to be that yo if you actually
meditate you focus your mind you'll get
access to the way the mind is the way
the mind objectively is and there's no
interpretation involved
and what i would say to that is
yeah let's
let's use poppers all observation is
theory laden even if you explicitly
don't think any verbal thoughts you
don't have anything coming up in
consciousness per se which is an
experience people can have there's still
an interpretational thought behind all
of that that says i'm not thinking right
now not in words but there's an
interpretational structure there a frame
even when you think your pure
consciousness there's interpretation of
experience there there's no experience
without interpretation and hence he
might be completely mistaken about that
fact because of his theoretical
framework there his theories might be
wrong and it's also the case that
yeah i think it's strange to identify
more with the conscious than the
unconscious part of the mind
to level it out a little bit of course
you can
use subjective experience to inquire
about the mind and you can use it as
kind of a
testing lab subjectively for different
theories you have but it's conjectural
just as anything else so no human have
direct access to their own thoughts
either and it's ridiculous in my book to
just limit thoughts and concepts to the
explicit level because that's just the
tip of the iceberg
that was an eloquent explanation of
precisely my thoughts on on that matter
and where one can have this experience
that sam also describes eloquently and
in the waking up app he
is at pains to
try to explain the experience of
what is happening during some of these
occasions where you have an experience
of apparently a lack of free will which
i wouldn't describe it that way but he's
describing this experience as being a
lack of free will but whatever that
experience is isn't cashed out until
later during the explanation and it's
that explanation which can contain all
sorts of errors that even if
sam regards as being accurate to him
making sense pardon the pun to him
that nevertheless could be flawed in
very serious ways in in the ways that
that i kind of
have suggested that if you go down the
road of well sam goes down the road not
only of denying free will but denying
the existence of the self as being
separate and so
not wanting to make a distinction
between self and the rest of
consciousness or conscious experience or
the rest of reality uh however it can be
phrased but but this is just to say as
as many people have over the years that
well you know
cats and cars and cucumbers don't exist
because ultimately all that exists are
the
fundamental particles in the universe
just interacting one with another but
this is a mistaken view of what science
is about science is about trying to
explain things not only at the
fundamental level but at every level of
emergence and emergence is a real thing
cats really do exist
over and above the fundamental particles
that make them up and so this is all
that we're saying
from the objective side of things about
free will that it is important to invoke
it as an explanation of people's
behavior now sam says that if we give
away free will if we give up on this
notion of free will we gain something
morally namely we gain the ability not
to blame people for their bad behavior
now we can also give up importantly this
notion of retributive justice so we can
then go down the road of saying well we
don't need to punish people in order to
get back at them in some sort of
vengeful way for when they do something
wrong in society if we accept that
there's no free will then we don't have
to well we don't have to do that anyway
we can be reasonable people who accept
that there is such a thing as free will
as people freely creating certain kinds
of knowledge that explains their
behavior but that doesn't mean that we
need to be retributive when they make a
mistake after all people are fallible
and they're going to make mistakes and
when people make mistakes which is
inevitable due to a lack of knowledge
due to a misconception then
there is a a degree of responsibility
there it's where they're focusing their
attention where they're choosing to
focus their attention but we don't need
to blame them because we are all of us
infinitely ignorant as papa says we can
all make mistakes uh terrible moral
mistakes at times
and and accepting that and accepting
that moral framework and that way of
viewing a human being and their
culpability we can then also have
compassion for them because we like they
are completely and utterly ignorant of
so much and can quite easily make errors
including important moral errors but i
think this is a compassionate way this
is indeed a more compassionate way to
accept that other people have free will
and sometimes they'll make the mistake
of focusing their attention on the wrong
things and that is not a reason to be
vengeful or to try to be retributive
when they do make mistakes it's a reason
for accepting that we can correct their
errors that we can help them to learn
the lessons that civilization thinks are
the most important moral lessons at the
moment
a positive vision of a human being as
this knowledge creator who will continue
to er enables us to have a legal system
a justice system that views people as
being yes
culpable in a sense but also capable of
changing capable of correcting their
errors and therefore we can be
compassionate we can we can we can use a
prison system for example as a place to
rehabilitate people and we can also have
a stance of
not wanting the death penalty for
example because we think that that is
that is a way of destroying the means of
error correction what a perfect way to
destroy the means of error correction by
destroying a person now they never have
the opportunity to actually correct the
error that caused them to get into this
situation where they might be put on
death row but if we have this this
positive vision of what people are as
creating knowledge correcting errors
then i think that's perfectly
compassionate and would be totally in
line with someone who who like sam is
also wanting us to have legal structures
that allow for compassion
i think this is a perfectly reasonable
way of conceiving of uh people as not
merely error prone but as as in a sense
divine in a sense uh
more than merely the outworkings of the
laws of physics as being something over
and above that emergent
causal entities in the universe that can
be corrected and course corrected when
they when they do make mistakes
inevitably we'll make mistakes
yeah that's a great view i think and
i know in my last episode with michael
golding he said something like
we were talking in the context of people
being delusional and and having
schizophrenia having paranoid delusions
and things like that and not acting
rationally as a result
and
he was addressing that and saying
something like well is this still a
person
and then he said of course it's still a
person even if the person was comatose
it would still be a person because
there's potential there
the creative potential and i think
that's an important thing to keep in
mind morally that i think ties into what
you said there
and you can still
uh use sam harris's own example of uh
charles whitman i think is the guy with
the tumor pressing on the amygdala
that is used to explain why he suddenly
shot a lot of people and killed himself
you could you don't have to go to either
extreme one extreme is saying that he is
not responsible at all we're all just
atoms in the void the other one or
because he has the tumor the other
extreme is to say that he is fully
responsible we don't care about the
tumor at all but you can you there's a
middle ground there where we can say
that it's a person a person is in
general responsible for their voluntary
behavior
we have to explain how much
harder it was for him to make certain
decisions when he has
i don't know a constant rage response of
course the the tumor might have
influenced him and made it much harder
for him to not do what he did than it
would have been for me who doesn't have
the tumor but there are gradations and
it still makes sense to keep
the agency of a person while still
thinking about what what counts as
involuntary behavior and here we don't
have enough good explanations of how
physiology ties in to creativity and the
software there to actually make that
judgment uh perfectly well well
perfectly well we can never do but you
know what i mean
yeah i i listened to that excellent
episode with michael there's a brilliant
insights in there and i think that uh as
michael hinted at sometimes with this
idea that we have about what people are
the misconception can creep in
that therefore people do have this in
some sense ultimate responsibility for
their behavior and that therefore for
example this leads to the misconception
i would suggest
that
things like medication aren't necessary
for any kind of psychological condition
um
i think this is a misconception for a
whole bunch of reasons you know this
idea that uh someone who believes in the
universality of the human mind and the
human mind is literally able to
you know model any kind of physical
system including itself it's such that
it can think its way out of problems so
if you're depressed you can think of
your way out of depression yeah in
principle yes this is true but this does
not mean that in practice you know how
to do this that you have the answer in
hand right now and i think michael was
right to sort of flag this as a reason
why you might need
medical interventions at times for
psychiatric conditions and i couldn't
agree more until such time as we have a
full scientific understanding of what
the human mind is doing then of course
we're going to have to use rules of
thumb we're going to have to use the
best solution we have at the moment and
for many people it's going to be certain
kinds of medication we simply can't
necessarily
think our way out of all the problems
that we're going to have and there will
be people who are going to need
these kind of interventions um yes but
there has been this misconception that
um that if you go down the road of uh
universality of the human mind therefore
oh well you just think your way out of
the
problem that you happen to be in i think
that no that's a that that's wrong in
principle yeah in some ultimate distant
future perhaps we might have the
ultimate psychiatric
solution to every single mental
condition and so therefore people will
know how to do that but we don't know
how to do that now and so in the interim
we're certainly going to have to rely
upon that the best knowledge that
psychiatrists and psychologists have in
order to
solve certain problems
all right brett might i thought it would
be great to
i just have to tell you what we we
started recording and then brett needed
some water so i did that mate thing uh
before too and i think that's ridiculous
that i have scripted jokes that's all
good it's cool
uh so yeah so
i thought we could end on twitter
questions i got a lot of questions this
time around so it'd be fairly impolite
not to go over some of them so uh yeah
let's see what we have here one is from
tristan
and he says i've listened to heaps of
breath stuff but something i haven't
heard him speak about much is the fun
criterion
curious what his thoughts are about its
strengths slash limitations and what he
thinks it means in practice
well that's a that's a tough one i'm not
yeah
i said i said earlier that um you've had
these excellent guests prior to me and
every time you had these guests on i
thought that person's done a better job
on that topic than i could ever do and
so when it comes to this i think lulu
could do a better job and of course
david could do a better job on this but
what i would say and this is going to
come across i don't know
a little arrogant but
i
don't know what the problem is that the
fun criterion says oh i shouldn't say
that i shouldn't say that i i guess i
know what the problem is that the fund
criterion is trying to solve it's trying
to give advice to people on
how they should devote their time where
they should put their time they should
follow the fun as lulu says you know you
need to find a problem fall in love with
it as popple would say
until such time as a new problem comes
along and then you fall in love with
those now
for me personally i i guess i've
implicitly just had on board running on
the software the fun criteria in my
whole life i was never concerned about
what anyone else thought about what i
was doing here and so i you know like i
say i was at school i just want to be an
astronomer that's all i wanted to do and
i went off to university and actually
did study astronomy and of course that
doesn't mean infallibly i i picked the
right subjects at uni i made a lot of
mistakes and end up um you know picking
things that i in retrospect after i
tried them i thought oh that was
terrible idea i won't do that again i
won't go down the road of of picking a
subject like psychology again so um you
know i did make errors along the way but
i had implicitly the fun criteria i was
just doing whatever i wanted to do and
through to today i just i've always done
what i wanted to do and i've never
really
much asked for advice on you know what
do you think i should study what do you
think i should pursue what job should i
get but of course i've been the person
that sometimes people have asked you
know what do you think i should do what
do you think i should study what
subjects should i take this kind of
thing and
i guess what i'm saying with respect to
the fun criteria i don't
i personally don't quite understand
what problem it's trying to solve which
sounds terribly arrogant as if i've got
all the answers i don't it's just that
i know what's fun for me and i can't
possibly
try to guess what it's going to be fun
for someone else other than to say what
david of course has said and lulu has
said follow the fun
so yeah i can't i can't i can't add uh
much insight to that yeah that doesn't
help at all does it
well i mean i guess you're you're the
wrong person to ask similar to how if
you as a skinny guy go up to the most
buff guy at the gym who just genetically
had the predisposition to build muscle
whatever the [__] he was doing then he's
not the guy to ask for answers on how to
build muscle for you right and so for
you
who's had seemingly a really cushy life
then brett
i'm glad for you
uh yeah maybe maybe you're not the right
person to ask but i i find that
interesting
i i've never heard anyone say anything
critical of the fund criterion within
the community itself so that's always
fun i do think that
it can be very helpful for for me who
has struggled a lot with psychological
and physiological issues that i won't
stop talking about it is very useful
because i've often forced myself to do a
lot of things out of uh duty or yeah
this is what i should do and being able
to use the phenomenology of am i
actually enjoying what i'm doing like
i'm doing right now with you is a very
useful marker
yeah of course i think that yeah so
that's where yeah i guess i had that
intuitive understanding i probably
couldn't have explained it explicitly
until david did put it into words but
that idea of if you're not having fun
that's a criticism of what you're doing
and the not having fun bit contains is
inexplicit content of you just feel bad
you've got this conflict between your
ideas about what you want to do and what
you are actually doing and of course
i've you know i'm not i'm not immune to
being coerced into things or even
coercing myself into things at times of
of violating my own
implicit fund criteria and i can still
you know people are fallible they make
mistakes so i think yes the most
important thing to probably extract out
of that fund criterion for anyone who
who needs more assistance in this this
area is to recognize that if you feel
bad about doing something whether it's a
job you have it's a book you're reading
it's a thing you're studying it's
relationship that you're in etc and so
on and so forth
if you're not having fun if it feels bad
that's a criticism and then you need to
go about doing the work to try and
figure out how you're going to solve
that it doesn't mean that you know if
you're in this job that you don't like
and you're not finding fun but you'll
immediately quit the job it could be a
solution but in almost all cases it
probably won't be the solution you need
to recognize that this is a reality and
then there's a positive way of thinking
about this you can improve your life you
know you don't have to you're not
compelled to remain in that place it
might be that you're going to be stuck
in that situation for
longer than you want to be but at least
if you consciously recognize the
situation you're in isn't fun it isn't
meeting the fun criterion then you can
begin the process of taking steps to get
yourself into a position where you are
meeting your own fund criterion
okay so next one here
well we've touched on basianism before
but
why do bayesian philosophers fail to
notice the inductive nature of basianism
including the less wrong community when
the crs see it so clearly
and then i would add to that when is it
actually useful to invoke probability
statements uh when explaining the world
because i'm grappling with that problem
myself
seeing how basism is essentially
inductivism with added maths and
probability
and it's not useful there when is it
actually useful well certainly in games
of chance probability is a useful uh way
of assessing your odds and to recognize
that you know
repeatedly going to the casino is
just not a viable way to secure your
future financially so that that's a
reasonable use of probability to
understand things like that now
probability is not useful in places
where you don't already know what the
odds are where you're just making a
guess about the future and ignoring the
role of human creativity there so
places where probability will be useful
is where human creativity is not
involved so you can think of places
where that might be the case for example
you know you run a factory and the
factory is uh using some sort of
robotic system to just keep on producing
the widgets that you're producing
and you can do a frequency analysis on
how often the robot makes mistakes makes
errors now human creativity isn't
involved in that process until you
decide as the factory owner to get
yourself involved in that process so you
can have a good estimation of how much
money you're wasting based upon how
frequently the robot makes the makes an
error in your your production line kind
of thing so there are these ways of
using probability in quite reasonable
ways you know that my article my own
article on my website about bayesian
epistemology epistemology and scare
quotes begins with the tale about how it
can be used in
medicine for example and so there are
these ways in which
reasonable statisticians can deploy good
statistical methods in order to come to
conclusions where
a human being is not getting involved in
using their creativity so these are the
places where you can use probability
quite reasonably but as david's got this
wonderful talk uh online as well about
the misuses of probability probability
one of the most interesting ones that
i'm interested in is of course the
application of probability to quantum
theory and of course it forms an
important part of probability there it's
just whether or not you interpret the
probabilistic claims within quantum
theory as representing an actual
objective
probabilistic nature of reality which we
say isn't true it's not the case that
certain things will probably happen or
probably not happen
all the things that can happen do happen
in the quantum world but what we say is
you have subjective randomness so
there's subjectively you can calculate
the probability and this is known as as
far as i'm aware in my lay person's
understanding known as the decision
theoretic argument the idea that you can
you deploy probabilities from a
subjective point of view as long as you
don't take seriously the notion
that in fact things will probably happen
or not now as to the um first part of
your question
about why do bayesians continue to
endorse bayesianism not realizing the
inductivist nature well i don't know
that they understand the problem of
induction not many people do exactly uh
necessarily think that there's anything
wrong with induction um
it seems to make logical sense that this
is the way in which science works you
know the the sun has hitherto risen
every single day
therefore on the basis i can conclude
with some degree of confidence that it
will rise tomorrow they think that this
is what science is about and
you know as we know this is not what
science is about science is not about
making extrapolations the extrapolations
come much later after you have an
explanatory theory you can then derive
predictions from the explanatory theory
so in the case of the sun rising thing
well what you're actually talking about
there is well the the earth is rotating
on its axis and the sun is coming into
view you know once every sort of 24
hours kind of thing
and on that basis you then predict that
the sun will rise tomorrow but it's not
you know because of the past you know
the future is going to be the same way
but you know you have to have a sort of
at least a basic understanding of
the popular picture of epistemology
before you understand
all the ways in which inductivism uh
this this claim about inductivism is
false can't work can't possibly work
never did work
and so therefore any attempt to sharpen
it up i think you had a wonderful way of
explaining this i think we were we were
talking offline where you you said um
you know uh inductivism uh we know
inductivism doesn't work uh here's all
the ways in which deductivism doesn't
work vasanism comes along and says and
yet here's the way in which inductivism
works you know so it simply is wrong and
all we need to do is to refute
the inductivist conception of
knowledge production in order to refute
bayesianism because basianism is just
sort of the icing on the top of this
inductivist misconception
yeah i mean
you only have the knowledge you have
right so i i don't find it strange that
the
community that endorses patientism and
might not engage that much with popper
often times as when stephen pinker
recently tweeted out that article
as a supposed refutation of popper's
view
it's a mistaken view of popper it's a
doomham quine problem all over again and
we've already responded to that yeah so
i think it's just a matter of
them not engaging with the refutations
enough to see the problems and i
remember myself when i read beginning of
infinity the first time inductivism was
one of the hardest parts for me to
really grasp and i remember that feeling
you talked about in the beginning
that was for you with quantum theory
finally clicked for me when i was laying
in the bathtub listening to the
audiobook i really understood why you
couldn't induce
knowledge from the census so i think
it's pretty tricky you have to put in
the work to create that knowledge for
yourself
yeah absolutely and i think there's
something
to be said for
the idea that knowledge is conjectural i
think people balk at that they want a
solid foundation they desire a solid
foundation because that's the culture
that's religious type thinking i think
that it just imbues the culture that we
need a touchstone we need a book you
know the inerrant word of god but of
course you know these rationalists will
say well you know we don't we don't
endorse um christianity or judaism or
islam or any of these great ancient
mythologies we're beyond that you know
we are rational people who don't believe
in the supernatural but in fact their
epistemology is precisely the same
they're looking for a foundation an
authority
on which they can base all future claims
and we reject that you know and so that
that is a very deep attack a very deep
criticism of the
nature of knowledge in that framework of
having authorities and having
foundations and people who
are papyrian who who give up that notion
of needing a foundation and just instead
explaining things as this web of
interconnected knowledge none of which
is certain none of which relies upon an
authority
we enjoy that and we we we flourish
within that understanding of the way in
which knowledge works but
i can appreciate and accept that
it has got to be emotionally unsettling
you know you can either enjoy the roller
coaster that sense of vertigo that i've
spoke about at the beginning or you can
be terrified at the roller coaster and
think oh my gosh i don't want to do this
something's really going to go wrong and
if you take away the foundation from
people they think that it's going to end
up in relativism of course it doesn't
it's the furthest thing from relativism
because we say that you can be wrong
about stuff that's the whole point of
popularity epistemology you can be wrong
you can refute things you can say what
is wrong so it's not relativism but
people who misunderstand it think that
if you give up the foundation you give
up the truth therefore you're a
relativist and it's just that's just not
the case the relativists have much more
in common with the foundationalists than
they have with us the relativists say
there is no such thing as truth and the
foundationalists are just sort of
flipping that and saying no there
absolutely is and we've got it in hand
already so
this is uh yeah so this is why we kind
of uh fighting on two fronts against the
relativists and against the
fundamentalist foundationalists i mean
of course the rationalists wouldn't
think of themselves as fundamentalists
uh they would think of themselves as
rationalists open to any idea but of
course they uh ultimately they they are
they are committed to certain
premises they want to find the
the certain axioms upon which to build
the edifice of knowledge and and
hopefully they'll they'll complete the
edifice of knowledge at some point in
the future and then they'll be able to
tell everyone else what to do because
they will be the final arbiters of truth
being the philosopher kings and experts
that they are
yeah i can't wait for that
sounds good
yeah so a quick follow up on that you
said with the the probability statements
there let's say we have a medical
situation
where
a person is showing symptoms and we have
three different alternatives
that equally well explain the symptoms
and
we don't have any explanation for what
to choose there and let's say we just
have to choose one of them and we do we
don't have any experiments right now
that can falsify either of them does it
make sense to say there that yeah well
in 60
of previous cases
with these symptoms it's it's been x so
therefore we should try that one first
yeah absolutely and in fact that's one
of the kind of examples that i use in my
article my i think i can't run my
article very well i just try and go off
top of my head but yeah if you have a
you know you're a doctor you have a
patient who presents in front of you
and
they say oh i've got all the symptoms of
malaria you know i've been on to dr
google and i think i've got malaria and
they're saying i've got the sweats and
whatever else then the doctor can make
an assessment being an intelligent
knowledgeable compassionate doctor and
say well ask some follow-up questions so
at that point they don't know they don't
know the only thing they've got to go on
is the symptoms that the person is
presenting with some of which include
symptoms similar to malaria like for
example sweating there or they've got
cold chills or whatever the symptoms of
malaria happen to be and so that's a bit
of evidence but it's nowhere near enough
to make the conclusion that in fact they
have a 60 chance of you know having
malaria but if on the other hand the
person comes and says i think i've got
malaria and
i've just come back from brazil and i
was in the amazon and i didn't take my
anti-malarials and i was you know in a
tent which wasn't you know protected
from the mosquitoes all of this well
then the probability goes up now you
might not be able to do a proper
calculation in the bayesian sense maybe
you can but this is the way in which you
know you kind of the doctor is is ruling
out
the alternatives to malaria and thinking
more and more this is malaria so then
what do you do well then you send them
off the tests to find out if they in
fact do have malaria and if the test
comes back positive
given all of this other evidence they
were in brazil they got bitten by
mosquitoes then you're pretty confident
that you know this person actually has
malaria on the other hand if that same
patient was to say
oh no i've never been anywhere near
mosquitoes i've been working in an
office for the last you know sort of
six months and i haven't seen any
mosquitoes i think i've got malaria the
doctor might very well send them off for
a test and if the test comes back
positive
then there is a less chance that that
person actually has malaria in other
words it could be a false positive this
is why we have this concept of false
positive and so this is a reasonable way
of using bayes's theory it's a perfectly
reasonable way of reasonably adjusting
our priors so they say in light of new
evidence okay in light of whether or not
the person has been in brazil or not and
got a positive malarial test or not
these things must cohere and come
together in order to help produce the
best explanation the person has malaria
or the person doesn't have malaria
yeah
so fallibilist asks does brett think
there's a biological cause for autism
in parentheses question is fundamentally
about universality
i don't know
but what i would say is that autistic
people people who are who show the
symptoms that are associated with what
people call autism
are still universal they're still
universal you know they're able to
explain anything that anyone else can
explain they might choose not to they
might shoot just like any of us might
you know in it's always about in
principle
the universality of the human mind is an
imprintable claim that in principle
one person can learn what anyone else
can learn that's the first part and one
person can
model an explanation of any physical
phenomena that's out there in principle
that doesn't mean that they'll ever want
to okay and there are certain kinds of
personalities that exist in the world
some people might call them conditions i
might say their personalities where the
person just simply isn't interested in
certain things that maybe the rest of us
are there's a whole bunch of things that
i'm not interested in
that doesn't mean that my mind is not
universal you know i'm just not
interested in for example all the
internal workings of how a trail bikes
internal combustion engine works okay my
brother is very interested in that kind
of thing but i'm not but it doesn't mean
that i couldn't if i really
wanted to to learn how the internal
combustion engine of our trail bike
works but the fact that i'm not
interested means it's going to be that
much harder for me to actually learn
that thing when you're not interested in
something it's much harder to learn and
so
this is the the way in which i would
view something like autism is that
there are people who just have very very
different interests to the rest of us
doesn't mean that they're incapable of
doing what the rest of us humans are and
maybe they can be persuaded you know i
think there are there are certain kinds
of treatments for autism that involve
you know talking and counselling and
that kind of thing that can that can
help people change their minds if they
want to but you know again we shouldn't
coerce them um if they don't if they
want to live the life the way they're
living it
then let's let them be and if they don't
if they want help if they're seeking
help if they seem to be in need of help
then we should also help them in a
compassionate and understanding way but
um yes
a person by definition is a universal
explainer and autistic people are
absolutely people and so it doesn't
matter who you are you can in principle
understand
things even if in practice you decide
not to
but so you wouldn't
say that it's analogous to let's say
schizophrenia under a theory like
michael goldings which
does invoke biological issues and not
just
ideas different ideas
so even if there's a biological
antecedent to any of these things even
if you are genetically predisposed to be
schizophrenic or autistic even if that's
in your genes so to speak that does not
mean that your mind can't be changed it
might be that much harder for you to
change your mind but that doesn't mean
that in principle you can't change your
mind one of my favorite examples about
this is well of all the things that we
are going to be if if at all we're going
to be genetically predisposed to think
to have an instinct for it's the
survival instinct we want to survive
we have a genetic predisposition on this
view to survive and almost everyone does
but hey people commit suicide all the
time unfortunately there are suicide
bombers you know in the evil case so
it's not like the mind can't override
this genetic predisposition now other
people might say the genetic
psychologist might say you know brett
weinstein might come on and say oh no
but you know those those suicide bombers
or the the people that commit suicide
due to depression they've got in their
genes the gene for suicide you know and
that is a that is a general purpose
explanation for any psychological
condition it doesn't matter what you do
there is some genetic component for it
and you will always be able to explain
it via that mechanism via it's in your
genes however we would say there's just
not enough information available inside
of the dna no matter how long that dna
molecule is it's not infinitely long and
yet the repertoire of behaviors that
people engage in is infinite it is
imprintable infinite we can do anything
we can think anything so that can't all
be stored inside that little molecule
big as it is largest molecule most
complex molecule that we know of we
can't put everything down all the
behaviors that human beings have down to
that but the evolutionary psychologists
nevertheless uh it's a it's a big
industry of telling people that
much of the way in which you think and
your interactions with other people come
down to what's in your dna and what i
would say about that is well there may
be genetic components to a whole bunch
of our behaviors but that does not mean
you are condemned
to engage in those behaviors you can
change your mind and even if you have an
instinct for certain things you can
avoid doing it no doubt there's
absolutely genes for hunger there are
genes for hunger somewhere in your dna
but that doesn't mean you have to eat it
doesn't mean you have to people choose
not to eat all the time sometimes people
choose to eat too much you can override
any instinct that you have it might be
hard it might be harder for some people
than others but that does not mean it's
in principle impossible in fact we would
always say it's in principle always
possible
yeah
no i mean i i feel like you're
insinuating that i should lose some
weight i'm really sensitive about that
so
i don't appreciate that but all right
i'll pretend you didn't say that
so i have two more questions for you
brett the first one is why are some
people more creative than others
i don't think they are so i just stopped
right there you know i think that was
this questioner that was saying
something about oh yes there we are
jitten um was saying yeah the likes of
bach mozart schubert uh why haven't they
been supposed well i don't know okay so
firstly i'd pull him up on the fact that
i i don't think there is a quantitative
difference between the creativity of one
person versus another i think everyone
is equally creative it's just where they
choose to devote their attention you
know there are some people who never go
into science or ever go into any
intellectual pursuit their entire
uh reason detroit is to raise children
and i think that is the the higher
probably the one of the highest callings
that we can have as people is to raise
children raise another generation and so
if you're putting your creative efforts
into that into you know ensuring your
household is
as functional and loving and caring as
it possibly can be you're financially
secure and your your kids are enjoying
their life i mean what more could you
possibly hope for you're being creative
you're devoting your intellectual
capacity your creative capacity in order
to
make the world a better place for your
children
very locally in your own home kind of
thing that doesn't mean you're not
creative just because you're not doing
physics or just because you're not
composing music does not mean you're not
as creative as those people um you know
even within the physics community within
the community of physicists there are
amazingly accomplished physicists there
are physicists who haven't published
quite so much and there are physicists
who publish barely anything and barely
achieve anything now what is the
explanation for the difference between
is it an inherent difference in their
physics capacity well yes but why well
because some physicists really do devote
many many hours you know 18 hours a day
to doing nothing but thinking about
physics and other physicists who devote
significantly less and if they were
honest with themselves they'd say you
know what really i only do devote about
three hours of thinking time a day even
though i'm a professional physicist i
get distracted too easily by
this that or the other thing and so i
think that this is the explanation that
people divide their attention and so
some people just don't divide their
attention that the likes of mozart for
example
i think he was singularly interested
apart from when he was chasing women
singularly interested in composing ever
better music now whether or not he
hasn't been surpassed which is what the
question said i don't know we could
debate that like i think that you know
modern musicians hasn't heard it very
well clearly
yeah yeah exactly exactly that kind of
thing so we would have a a difference in
in not only taste but also a difference
in in criteria for assessing you know
modern musicians i think yeah whoever
that fellow was that wrote the music for
game of thrones the soundtrack to that i
think he's a phenomenal genius now can
you compare him to someone like mozart i
think maybe possibly so
that's what i that's what i'd say about
that people are equally creative but
they devote those creative capacities to
very different things and therefore they
they are noticed in the world to a
different degree
yeah i mean i i think i agree with the
underlying sentiment there that i mean
fundamentally we all have the same
creative capacity and we can devote that
in different ways some show more
outward
output like someone like elon musk who's
actually out in the world he's a public
figure people see what he's doing or
mozart but
i i might disagree with you i i don't
think you meant this but clearly
some people even within the domain of
let's say child rearing that you brought
up there
some parents are going to create very
little knowledge and be very bad parents
whereas some other parents are going to
create a whole lot of knowledge within
that area and hence in a sense be much
more creative
even if it's not in a scientific
endeavor within that realm do you see
what i mean
in that way it does make sense to call
some people more creative than others
within within a particular domain so yes
there are there are many parents on the
face of the planet earth some of them
are highly committed and devoted to
their children and creating knowledge
about how to make their home a better
place for their children and some
parents who let's be honest aren't quite
so devoted and who might be focused on
other aspects of their own life and so
are using their creative capacity to
indulge in those other areas of life and
i'm not making any judgments here i
don't want you know of course parents
are going to have their um are going to
have their their their attention span
divided and sometimes that attention
span is divided precisely so that they
can provide for their children this is
why i say it's one of the most uh
intellectually difficult
possible tasks one can undertake is the
the taking on of a child the rearing of
a child and looking after a child
because you it must be just so hard to
decide where do you put your energies is
it in
spending
more and more time with the child and
helping the child is it in in creating
the financial conditions such that the
child can have as much fun and grow as
much as possible are these two things at
odds you know it's a whole
huge area of
of discussion but all i would all i
would just say is that yes some people
are going to create knowledge in certain
domains and not in other domains and
when you when you when you judge one
person against another within a narrow
domain you're going to find um
quantitative differences with how much
you know how good they are how skillful
they are at that particular thing
whether it's physics or whether it's you
know being a parent
yeah and i guess it's not as easy as
saying well it's all hardware and this
person has you know more iq which we
think is a software issue anyway but you
know those claims that you refuted
earlier from evolutionary psychology for
instance
don't cut it
can i ask you one more or should we
no yeah go ahead
yeah
you're on fire dude
damn man all right let's see here i'm
maybe i'm getting delirious you know it
is 10 p.m over here in australia so yeah
i've never done it this long but i mean
i i'm just uh i'm loving it so this is
great let's see here
that's why it's like you said
now when it comes to me they rarely say
that unfortunately yeah
okay so the last question is from fala
ballista and he says
he i suppose you mentioned he was
writing an essay on incrementalism
what is his view on pauper
popper's piecemeal approach and how does
that relate to the taxes are theft
libertarianism
uh so incrementalism is this idea that
in any domain what we want to do is to
make incremental progress as fast as
possible but always incrementally i call
it the digital view of knowledge so that
if you incrementally change in some way
that you can figure out whether or not
this incremental change has been for the
better or not and maybe it's an
incremental change within a scientific
theory and so you can figure out after
an experiment whether in fact it does
comport with reality or not but if it
doesn't then you can go back to the old
theory pretty quickly and in policy
making in government then you want to
make this incremental change
such that you can check to see the
effects and if it works well then
continue in that direction or otherwise
go backwards this is opposed to the idea
of revolution especially revolution in
politics but revolution anywhere else as
well completely upending everything that
we know
you hope that what comes out the end of
that is something better and you've got
no reason to think that upending
absolutely everything is going to result
in something better what you should
expect
is in upending everything you take
yourself
back to the stone age kind of thing you
you've given up on the knowledge of how
to run a civilization all this implicit
knowledge about how to run a
civilization how does this relate to the
idea that taxes are theft
it it doesn't i don't think that there's
a there's a straight line between the
incrementalism idea and the taxes are
theft idea i'm just against coercion uh
just broadly speaking i'm against
coercion um against authority authority
and science
for example in in saying that we need to
believe this theory because this expert
scientist says so
uh you know believe the science that's
that's the the catch cry of today and i
i think that's an authoritarian response
what we need to do is of course um to
take seriously our best explanations but
that does not mean that we need to
believe in other words to accept as
absolutely true
these scientific theories so i reject
authority within science i also reject
and i like to say question authority but
i don't like the idea of authority
within states and within governments
either we have them
and
i guess the incremental part is i would
want to
incrementally undo the amount of power
that certain states and certain
governments have at least you know in
the history and for everyone listening
if you are a committed supporter of one
side of politics you have to expect that
for a certain amount of time the other
side is going to be in charge so don't
you want them to have as little power as
possible over your life because when
they get in charge aren't they going to
make the place just awful for you to
exist in because you're a real supporter
of the other side so incrementalism here
is to just gradually enact policies to
take away the power of the state and i
would say gradually implement policies
to take away
taxes as well now why is taxation theft
well we could go down that road but it's
probably a topic really for another
podcast to explain the coercive nature
of
when someone puts effort in when someone
puts physical work into their day-to-day
life trying to earn money for themselves
and their family of a third party coming
along and saying hey you know that
output that work that you did i'm going
to take a share of that that's mine
because i'm from the government and
here's my badge and you know we built
that road outside and you know he you
you owe us for that um so we could
that's a that's a huge discussion that
uh yeah maybe we can say for our next
conversation
let's do that bret for president i have
to say
definitely not definitely not
no because then you wouldn't have time
to do your lovely uh videos and uh
podcasts so
yeah man i i mean i i had a great time
this was a leviathan of an episode and
uh i'm really psyched to have gotten to
pick your brain for this long man so uh
thanks a million i hope we get to talk
again soon and uh good luck with all
your future endeavors here
let's do it again and more power to you
chris i look forward to continuing to be
a subscriber and a listener to explain
all right okay thanks man have a good
day
[Music]
you